>>REGINA MEREDITH: In
my last conversation
with Michael Cremo, we discussed
the way in which science
filters knowledge to
conveniently fit with commonly
held views, particularly the
religious kind of devotion
to Darwinism.
In this interview,
we show the evidence
for the extreme antiquity
of the human race,
leaving little argument
for the position
that we evolved
from apes-- no less,
only a few thousand years ago.
And one of the
things that came up
just before we went on today,
Jay Weidner came in and said,
have you seen this article
that just came out?
And it says 300 million
year old tooth wheel
found in Russian coal,
embedded in coal.
And what was the
original-- well,
right now it's in the
"Huffington Post."
300 million year old
tool of some kind,
it was a gear of some kind.
Does that fit at all
within your understanding
of our human antiquity?
>>MICHAEL CREMO: Yes, it does.
I think humans have been
present for hundreds
of millions of years on Earth.
And there are other
discoveries that
are consistent with
this most recently
reported one from Russia.
Of course, these things
always need further study.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: But there are, in
the scientific literature,
reports of discoveries that
are consistent with this.
For example, in the year
1862, a scientific journal
called "The Geologist"
published an interesting report.
A human skeleton was found
90 feet below the surface
of the ground in Macoupin
County in the state of Illinois
in the United States.
And we got in touch
with geologists
of the State Geological
Survey of Illinois.
And we asked them how
old is the formation
at that level at that place?
And they said about
300 million years.
So that's consistent with
this recent report from Russia
of this aluminum object,
gear-shaped object, that
was found in coal
deposits of Vladivostok
in Far Eastern Russia.
And there are reports
from the same time period.
In the year 1892, a woman
named Mrs. Robert Culp
was putting a piece of coal
into a coal burning stove.
And it was a big piece of
coal, so she broke it in half.
And inside she found a gold
chain about 10 inches long.
>>REGINA: A gold chain?
>>CREMO: Yes.
>>REGINA: I mean, real,
sophisticated little gold
links?
>>CREMO: Yeah.
And we were able to get from
the report the name of the mine
that this object came from.
And we asked geologists how
old is the coal in that mine?
And again, they said
about 300 million years.
>>REGINA: This is a vast
expanse between these two
places, Vladivostok and England.
>>CREMO: Well, this would
be from the United States,
from the state of Illinois.
>>REGINA: Oh, this one was
>>CREMO: Right.
>>REGINA: OK, got you.
Even more vast reach.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CREMO: And then
there was another case
of a gold thread being
found in England.
That was reported in
an English newspaper
from the 19th century.
And that, again, was about
from the same time period.
So they're very
interesting discoveries.
They completely
contradict everything
that most scientists now
think about human origin.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And we're going to get into
many, many more of these.
However, when we look at it
from kind of a classical,
as it's taught now,
archaeological point
of view, what would be said of
what was going on on the Earth
300 million years ago?
What would that depiction be?
>>CREMO: Well, according to
the classical understanding,
that would be during the
Carboniferous period.
And they would say
at that time there
were jungles of
gymnosperm plants.
And gymnosperm means not of
the flowering plant family,
in other words,
things like ferns
and other types of
plants of that nature.
And there would have
been amphibians.
This would be from
before the time
of the dinosaurs,
certainly no human life
according to the standard
picture of things.
Just various types of amphibians
and plants on the Earth.
>>REGINA: So we're looking
at a huge discretion
here in terms of what
was actually populating
the planet 300
million years ago.
If we have something
capable, a human,
capable of creating an
instrument of some kind,
a tool of some kind-- they
say it's a tooth wheel?
What does that mean?
It's like a gear
box of some kind?
>>CREMO: Well,
actually it's a bar,
it's a bar-shaped
structure that has
what appear to be gears on
it that-- You know, they--
In different types of machines
that we have today, there
are these gear bars that
operate in connection with gear
wheels that are
part of machines.
>>REGINA: OK.
So, yeah.
So that existed, a finally
fabricated gold chain
existed 300 million years ago.
We do have a huge discrepancy.
And you studied
this from a couple
of different points of view.
You've done a vast amount
of research as documented
in your book, "Forbidden
Archeology," which
is more than 900 pages
of evidence for this.
In addition, you
are also a devotee
of an aspect of the
Vedas that talks
about the large, long
cycles of history
where human beings are
wiped out or somehow,
whether it's a cataclysm
or what, disappear,
re-evolve-- not evolve--
reappear with their knowledge
intact apparently.
And this keeps on and
on and on for how long?
Over what span of
time would the Puranas
say humankind has been here?
They would say that humans
have appeared and reappeared
in the course of
vast cycles of time.
The basic unit of
this cyclical time
is called the kalpa or the
Day of the Brahma, which
lasts about 4 billion years.
>>REGINA: And we discussed
that a little bit
in our last conversation.
How many of those cycles
have there already been?
>>CREMO: Endless
numbers of them.
>>REGINA: So we could have
been there trillions of years?
>>CREMO: Yes.
But according to the current
kalpa, the most recent creation
or manifestation
of that, we would
expect to find evidence for a
human presence going back say,
about 2 billion years roughly.
And before that, it would be
like if you had a computer disk
and you wiped out
the evidence on it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: You know, that's what
happens at the end of a kalpa.
It's like whatever is there in
the material manifestation just
gets wiped away, so that
you have a clean disk.
So when the next kalpa
or creation event comes,
it gets written on again.
>>REGINA: And that's why
you wouldn't find evidence
that would necessarily date back
into the hundreds of billions
or trillions of years even if
you had the instrumentation
to do that.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
According to the Veda
cosmology, the universe
is trillions of years old.
And it will continue to
exist for trillions of years.
But at different
times in these cycles,
things become unmanifest.
And then they're
manifested again.
>>REGINA: And so the good
news there-- for anybody
who thought the
world was supposed
to have ended last month
on December 21, 2012--
is that from the
Veda perspective,
we are now only halfway
through the daytime cycle
of the Day of the
Brahma, which means
we have another couple billion
years where life flourishes
and continues to
manifest on Earth.
>>CREMO: It's interesting
that you say that.
Earlier this year, I
was giving some lectures
at universities in India.
And one of the questions I
was getting from students
is is there going to
be doomsday in 2012?
When I said earlier this
year, I mean earlier in 2012.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: Earlier last
year, early in last year
I was giving some lectures
at universities in India.
And that was one of
the common questions
I was getting from students.
Because in India, they had
been playing this movie "2012"
on all--
>>REGINA: Oh, god.
>>CREMO: --the cable channels.
>>REGINA: That's horrible.
>>CREMO: And there's
this one image
where this huge tidal wave
comes washing over India
up into the Himalayan Mountains.
And there's a monk
up there, you know--
>>REGINA: Which is awful.
>>CREMO: --watching this
huge tidal wave coming.
>>REGINA: You assured them
in your tradition, no.
We're fine--
>>CREMO: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --for
another couple billion.
>>CREMO: Yeah, so
you can register
for next year's classes.
>>REGINA: You got 2 more
billion in the cycle.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
We've got some time.
It's going to happen,
but not anytime soon.
>>REGINA: OK.
OK, now going back.
When we talked last
time, we were really
setting a case of why
knowledge is filtered,
and that there is a larger kind
of agenda that really feeds
into a materialistic view of
life, which leads to ultimately
consumerism, which has its
devastating consequences if we
overconsume, which of
course we are doing.
Right?
I mean, I'm just trying
to put it in a nutshell.
>>CREMO: Sure.
>>REGINA: And so when we
talked about your early past,
you were of a mind that you
wanted to find evidence.
If you were reading these
ancient Vedic texts that
were talking about
this extreme antiquity,
your hypothesis is there
has to be evidence for it.
And so you set out to
find it, and you did.
And so in this
conversation, I'd really
like to talk about the time in
which some of these discoveries
were made.
This whole period of the
early 20th century, I mean,
it was an explosion of
experimentation and discovery
of all kinds.
It seemed to shut down
by mid-20th century.
Late 19th, early 20th
century, all kinds
of things we being discovered
on a spiritual level
and on a material level.
>>CREMO: Yeah, you're
right about that.
A lot of the
archaeological evidence
for extreme human antiquity
was being publicly reported
by scientists in the late 19th
century and early 20th century.
And also, when we look at
alternative explanations
for human origins that involve
some kind of spiritual element,
we see that a lot of
prominent scientists
were conducting research
into the paranormal
and things like that.
And I think there were
a couple of reasons
why that kind of research
stopped being publicly reported
by prominent scientists.
And one reason is that, in terms
of the archaeological evidence
for extreme human
antiquity, before that time,
they really didn't have
their timeline totally fixed.
As a result of some
discoveries that
were made in the
late 19th century,
they fixed their timeline so
that they would have humans
like us appearing
less than a couple
hundred thousand years ago.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: And then, because
they had fixed their timeline
in that way, then they dismissed
all these earlier discoveries
that had shown human beings were
existing for far longer periods
of time going back many
millions of years even.
Because they were
saying, well, if humans
like us appeared less
than 200,000 years ago,
then these other discoveries
couldn't possibly be true.
So let's forget about them.
And they were forgotten.
And in terms of the alternative
explanations of human origins
that involve what we might
call paranormal elements,
there were scientists who were
investigating these things,
but they also stopped publicly
reporting these things
in the early 20th century.
And I think there are
some reasons for this.
And one reason was that
governments and corporations
started putting huge
amounts of money
into science around the
time of World War I.
And they wanted results from
their investment in science.
They wanted very
specific things.
They wanted weapons.
They wanted pharmaceuticals.
They wanted consumer products.
And scientists
decided, well, if we
want all this money,
billions of dollars,
that corporations
and governments are
prepared to give us,
we should kind of
limit our scientific activity
to things that further those--
>>REGINA: Economic agendas.
>>CREMO: --particular goals.
And therefore,
they decided, well,
all this paranormal
research and things
of that, that isn't really
contributing to that.
So let's focus on the
strictly material things.
And in a sense,
that was productive
because they did get a
lot of influence, because
of the huge investments that
government and corporations
made in science that
would give weapons,
that would give
pharmaceuticals, that
would give consumer products.
But there was a cost to that.
And I think we're
still suffering
the effects of that bargain
that was made at that time.
Because what we wind up with
is an incomplete picture
of reality that leaves
out the spiritual element.
>>REGINA: Everything
non-physical.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
Because of that, I think we've
got an environmental crisis.
We've got a financial
crisis, and we've
got a political crisis in the
world, intensifying levels
of conflict that just
don't seem to go away
no matter how hard we try.
>>REGINA: And then, when you--
And it's not only
that it seems like it
was convenient to
be able to develop
these industries and such.
But something more
aggressive happened.
It seems that anything that
wasn't able to be borne out
in a materialistic
realm of science
actually was subject to
ridicule from that point
forward as well.
I mean, it wasn't
just that we need
to focus on this for a while.
There was almost
a direct attempt
to kill the other types
of research and science,
where it just sort
of disappeared.
for decades, as
a matter of fact,
till some of the scientists of
the more modern era from '70s
forward started really
researching into it
again at universities even.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
And not only did they
ridicule people at the time,
but they rewrote the
whole history of science.
For example, if you look
in any physics textbook
today, you'll see descriptions
of the work of Pierre and Marie
Curie, who were
husband and wife.
They both got Nobel
Prizes for their work
in discovering radium
and doing a lot
of the early research
in radioactivity.
And you'll read about
that in the textbooks.
But what you won't read about
is the years of research
they did with psychics,
people with paranormal powers.
>>REGINA: I mean,
that's real science,
where you're willing to
look into all realms.
It's not just exclusive
to one or the other.
And they did this for quite
a long time, didn't they?
>>CREMO: Yes.
They did two years of research
with a medium, an Italian lady
named Eusapia Palladino.
And this woman had some
psychokinetic abilities,
mind over matter abilities,
that they wanted to test.
And they thought these ideas
were relevant to physics.
And they were part
of a group of 20
prominent European
scientists who
were conducting these
experiments with this medium
in Paris early in
the 20th century.
And they got tremendous
results on one occasion.
They were sitting
with the medium
in the laboratory of
the Psychology Institute
in Paris in broad daylight.
And the medium was
sitting in a chair.
Marie Curie was
holding her hands.
Other scientists
were holding her feet
making sure she
wasn't moving at all.
And in the middle of the
lab, under what he described
as perfect conditions
of observation,
Pierre Curie said a large
table, like this one,
was floating about 3
feet off the ground.
And he was measuring how
high it was floating,
timing how long it was floating.
And after two years of
such results, you know,
the entire group of
scientists signed
documents saying these
things are absolutely true.
Pierre Curie wrote to some of
his prominent physicist friends
and said, we have to take
these things into account
if we're going to have a
complete picture of reality.
But this sort of thing is absent
from the current textbooks
of physics.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>CREMO: You'll only find the
work they did with radium.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: And
therefore, people today
get an incomplete picture of
what real science actually is.
When they hear
something like mediums,
psychokinetic abilities,
they would say,
this is outside the
bounds of real science.
>>REGINA: But they were
using scientific techniques
and protocols to prove these
things out now 100 years ago.
>>CREMO: Yes, they were.
And I think that
is real science--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: --a science that takes
into account everything that's
possibly true about the
world that we live in.
And you know, a few years
ago, I was giving a lecture
at a university of Europe
in the country of Hungary.
It was their main
science university.
And I was speaking to
a group of physicists
and graduate
students of physics.
And I was going through what
I call the hidden history
of physics, the accounts
of great physicists,
like the Curies, who had done
research in these fields that
are now considered outside
the bounds of real physics
or science.
And I was wondering what
they were going to say.
So afterwards, one of the
physicists came up to me
and said, you know, I'm glad
that you gave this talk.
By day, I'm doing
plasma physics,
the physics of
superheated gases.
But he told me,
privately at night, I'm
doing some experiments
in telepathy.
He told me, I have a son.
Yeah, he's young.
And I put him in another room.
And then I flip a
coin, and he's got
to tell me whether it's heads--
>>REGINA: I used to
do that with my son.
Tails.
>>CREMO: --or tails.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CREMO: He said, my
son is getting 80%--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CREMO: --correct, which
is really unexpected.
>>REGINA: Kids are good, yeah.
>>CREMO: And he said,
I wouldn't tell this
to any of my colleagues,
because they'd
think I've gone off
the reservation.
But he felt safe in
speaking to me about it.
So this is something
I often encounter,
that sometimes there're
scientists who, by day, appear
completely orthodox,
but privately, they
have other opinions.
>>REGINA: Well, it makes sense.
If they have an inquiring
mind, why wouldn't they
want to know a larger
picture, really?
>>CREMO: Sure.
>>REGINA: I mean, this dates
back to Sir Isaac Newton.
I mean, most people
think of him as sort
of the godfather of the
materialist view of science.
However, that wasn't his
sole interest at all, was it?
>>CREMO: No.
He actually spent quite a bit
of time researching things
like alchemy and other
paranormal topics.
And he wrote
extensively about them.
This is rarely mentioned
in physics textbooks.
There are some
historians of science
who have looked into this.
But in terms of
scientific discussion
today, they ignore these aspects
of his work, which I think
is unfortunate.
>>REGINA: It is.
How long have they
been filtering
that part of his works out?
>>CREMO: I would
say the past-- well,
of course he was living
during the 18th century.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: So it's something that
started in earnest, I believe,
in the 19th century--
>>REGINA: OK.
>>CREMO: --and
early 20th century.
>>REGINA: Again, we keep
going back to the same period.
Massive amounts of discoveries
just prior to that, and then
a seeming quashing of
the evidence after that,
following that, which
is the interesting.
And I know we did talk
about that in the last show.
What I would like to do also--
there were a couple others.
If you could get to
Sir Oliver Lodge?
>>CREMO: Sir Oliver Lodge was
a prominent British physicist
who lived in the
early 20th century.
And he had a son named Raymond.
And his son Raymond
died during World War I.
He was in the British military.
He was killed in Europe.
So after that, Lodge
tried to establish contact
with the spirit of his son.
And he made use of a medium.
And he went in disguise.
And he didn't let the
medium know who he was.
And through the interactions
with this medium,
he got communications
from a conscious entity
that revealed things
that would only
have been known to his
son, very intimate details
about the family history and his
personal dealings with his son.
So what I find interesting is
that Lodge published a book
about this whole case.
And in it, he dealt
with a lot of the types
of skeptical
objections that might
be made by some of his
scientific colleagues.
So I think it's a
really good example
of a prominent
physicist who came
to accept that
consciousness can survive
the death of the physical body.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: And this is something
I'm absolutely convinced of--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: --that this body is
a vehicle for a conscious self
that has a non-material source.
Now, this idea is not
very popular in the world
of science today.
The most common idea today
in the world of science
is that consciousness
is produced
by the interaction of
chemicals within the brain.
Most cognitive or
neuroscientists
would say if you organized
the molecules in the brain
in a sufficiently
complex way, they'll
generate consciousness,
but only temporarily
and only in association with--
>>REGINA: With
firings of the brain.
>>CREMO: --the firings-
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: --of the
brain, which means
ultimately there is
no conscious self
that could survive the
demise of the physical body.
>>REGINA: This is interesting,
because it brings us
into the subject of this
dual nature of ourselves,
which you're saying in
your work is absolutely
essential to being able to
piece together-- utilizing
the non-physical aspect
of our intelligence
is essential in piecing
together our ancient history.
You can't do it just
looking for bones alone.
That's not sufficient.
>>CREMO: Absolutely.
Now, what the stones
and bones show us
if we actually look at
all of the evidence--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: --is that
humans have been here
since the very beginning
of life on Earth.
When people read my book
"Forbidden Archeology,"--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: --they noticed that.
>>CREMO: And now
what that means is
we need new explanations
for human origins.
So people would ask
me that question.
OK, what is your explanation
of how we came about?
And to answer that
question, I wrote
a book called
"Human Devolution."
And what I proposed
there was before we even
ask the question where did
human beings come from,
we should first of all ask the
question what is a human being?
Now, as I was just saying
today, most scientists
would say we're just
machines made of matter.
And as far as mind and
consciousness are concerned,
well, if you organize
matter in a very complex way
in the brain, the brain will
produce mind and consciousness.
So it's a very materialistic
conception of who we are.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: But what
I'm proposing is
that we're made of three things,
matter, the ordinary chemical
elements.
That's part of what we are.
But beyond that, there
is a subtle mind element
with some very unusual
powers like remote viewing--
>>REGINA: Which
everyone's capable of.
>>CREMO: Yes.
>>REGINA: Everyone.
>>CREMO: And we could
talk about that.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Well, yes.
>>CREMO: And beyond that
subtle mind element,
there is a conscious self
which is totally non-material.
Now, when I'm speaking about
mind and consciousness,
I don't mean
temporary byproducts--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: --of brain chemistry.
I mean real things with their
own independent existence.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Subtle bodies.
>>CREMO: Right.
So if we're going to
explain where we came from,
we have to explain, well,
where does that consciousness
come from?
Where does the matter come from?
How do they all come
together in the human form
as we experience
it on this Earth?
So what I'm proposing is
that originally, we're
beings of pure conscience.
That's what we are.
We originally exist in
harmony with all other beings
of pure consciousness and the
source of all conscious beings.
But if a conscious self
leaves that original state,
then it becomes
associated with matter.
It comes down into
lower levels of reality.
And why is that?
Well, it's because that original
level of pure consciousness
is based on love,
unselfish love.
If a conscious self becomes
exploitative or selfish,
it could no longer
exist in that harmony.
It needs a field
of activities where
it can act out its desires to
control, dominate, and exploit
matter and others.
>>REGINA: In these denser
physical frequencies
or realities.
>>CREMO: Yes.
Absolutely.
And for that purpose,
it needs a vehicle.
And there are different
kinds of vehicles.
There are human vehicles.
They are plant vehicles.
There are animal vehicles.
According to the state
of consciousness,
it is placed in a
certain vehicle.
And where do those
vehicles come from?
Well, it comes from higher
intelligences in the cosmos.
>>CREMO: And it's
worth bringing up
at this point, I think, the
point, because it struck me
in your book, that the
co-founder of the theory
of evolution with
Darwin-- I mean,
the way it was ultimately
played out politically,
Wallace-- actually
came to believe
there is an evolution of sorts.
But it's guided by a
higher intelligence, which
has come to be, as we were
saying off camera, kind
of a fusion between
science and religion,
so that it can live peacefully
together at this point in time.
>>CREMO: Yes.
I think Wallace was an
excellent example of that.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CREMO: He was
able to integrate
his spirituality
and his science.
And the result is a more
complete and better science.
>>REGINA: Right.
And right now,
they're saying, well,
show me the physical evidence.
So along that line, we
have a few little pieces
that we can talk about.
I just took a few
excerpts from your book
just to drive home the point
that these bones exist.
This isn't theory.
One of them I found
intriguing, because it's not
far from where I live actually,
is in the California Gold Rush
territory, Table Mountain,
that particular discovery.
If you could talk about that a
bit, because that's quite old.
>>CREMO: That is a
really fascinating case.
As I say, my work starts
with the stones and bones.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CREMO: But from there,
it goes on to other things.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>CREMO: But an
important first step--
>>REGINA: So in the trenches.
>>CREMO: --in getting there from
the scientific point of view
is showing there
is evidence that
contradicts the current
theories of human origins.
Now, in the mid-19th
century, gold
was discovered in California.
And to get the gold,
miners came to places
like Table Mountain,
which is near Sonora in--
>>REGINA: Tuolumne County.
>>CREMO: --Tuolumne County in
the Sierra Nevada Mountains.
And they were digging tunnels
into the sides of that mountain
to get the gold.
And deep inside the
tunnels in the solid rock,
the miners found human
bones and human artifacts.
They found stone
mortars and pestles.
They found obsidian
spear points.
They found human
bones and teeth.
These objects were collected
by Dr. J.D. Whitney, who
was the chief government
geologist of California.
Mount Whitney is
named after him.
He was a very
prominent scientist.
And he reported
these discoveries
to the scientific world.
Now, what makes them
really significant
is they're found in
layers of solid rock
that modern geologists tell us
are about 50 million years old,
which is really
quite extraordinary
because the dominant idea today
is that humans like us came
into existence less
than 200,000 years ago.
So to have this evidence
showing that humans
like us were present
50 million years ago
is really quite astonishing.
>>REGINA: They're still looking
for Native American Indian
arrowheads as evidence of
our antiquity from a couple
hundred years ago.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
And this discovery, as
announced by Dr. Whitney,
created some controversy.
And the scientific
community basically
rejected the discoveries.
And it's interesting
why they rejected it.
There was an anthropologist
named William Holmes, who
worked at the Smithsonian
Institution in Washington DC.
And he wrote in
one of his reports,
if Dr. Whitney had understood
the theory of human evolution,
he wouldn't have come
to those conclusions.
And in other words,
if the facts didn't
support the theory of
evolution with its ideas
of a recent origin
for the human species,
he shouldn't have
published that report.
He should've known these things
could not possibly be true.
Now, many people think that the
way scientists should operate
is that if facts are discovered
that contradict a theory,
the theory should be modified
to accommodate the facts.
But that's not the way
that it always works.
And in this case, it
most certainly wasn't.
So according to Holmes,
these discoveries
should not have been reported.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: They should have
simply been forgotten.
And basically,
that's what happened.
Now Whitney, he
published this report.
It was published by Harvard
University in the year in 1880.
But we don't read about
these things in the textbooks
today, because of what I call a
process of knowledge filtration
that operates in the
world of science.
Now, some of those
artifacts are still
in the collection of the
Museum of Anthropology
at the University of
California at Berkeley.
And I've been there.
I've seen them.
But the average person
who goes to the museum
would not suspect that
those things are there.
They're not shown to the public.
The average person would have
no idea that they're there.
>>REGINA: And what about-- there
was also something in Kentucky
that harks back to about
300 million years ago.
I don't think it's the same as
what we talked about earlier.
Wasn't it human
footprints they found?
>>CREMO: Yes.
There was a scientist
working in Kentucky
in the 1930s and
1940s who reported
the existence of
human footprints
in sedimentary formations
about 300 million years old
in Kentucky.
Now, some of the
skeptics said, well,
these must've been carved
into the rock somehow.
But he did detailed
studies, and he
showed that-- he did
microphotographic studies that
examined the grains
of sand in this rock.
And it showed that
there was compression.
In other words, that
the grains of sand
at the bottom of the footprints
were compressed together more
than the grains
of sand at the top
of the sides of the
footprint, which
indicated they were
made by pressure--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: --not by
carving into the rock.
Now, some-- one of the
skeptical scientists
reported in a
scientific journal.
It says, if this
is true, then we
should give up our
professions as scientists
and all take jobs
as truck drivers.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Well, sometimes that
might've been a good idea.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
It might have been.
But yes, that's another case
of archaeological evidence
for extreme human antiquity.
And here, we're looking at that
300 million year mark again,
same as the two instances
we talked about earlier on.
Let's do the reverse of what I
asked you the first time, which
is what was the modern
scientific view of what
was happening on the Earth
300 million years ago.
Now, you already answered that.
Now, let's look at what was
happening 300 million years ago
if you go back to the
kalpa or the yuga cycles?
>>CREMO: Well, according
to the Vedic cosmology,
the kalpa is divided into
sub-cycles called Manvantara
periods.
And according to the Veda
cosmological calendar,
we are now in the middle
of the seventh Manvantara
period of the
current kalpa, which
began about 2 billion years ago.
So according to the
Vedic cosmology,
after each Manvantara,
there is a devastation
after which the Earth
has to be repopulated.
So that would mean if we're
in the seventh Manvantara now,
then that means there have
been six devastations spaced
at intervals of about
300 million years--
>>REGINA: OK.
>>CREMO: --in the current
kalpa or Day of Brahma.
Now, it's interesting
that according
to modern paleontology, there
have been six major extinction
events in the history of life
on Earth spaced at intervals
of several hundred million
years, the last one being
the one that wiped
out the dinosaurs.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>CREMO: 300 million
years ago would
be in the middle of the
sixth Manvantara period
according to the Vedic
cosmological calendar.
And according to the Puranas,
the Vedic historical text,
there were humans
existing on Earth
during the sixth
Manvantara period
and the fifth and the fourth
and the third of the first even.
>>REGINA: This is now
taking us back billions
and billions and
billions of years.
>>CREMO: Hundreds of
millions of years.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CREMO: Hundreds of
millions of years.
>>REGINA: And even billions.
>>CREMO: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And here we go.
So the other number
that keeps coming up--
and I saw this repeatedly, I've
only pulled one example of it,
the Moulin Quignon jaw,
but it came up repeatedly
in your book-- was a period
of roughly 400,000 years ago.
It seems like a
lot of discoveries
have taken place that have
unearthed remnants of humans
from 400,000 years ago as well.
>>CREMO: Absolutely.
There are a lot of discoveries
that date back to that period
between 300,00 and
400,000 years ago.
The Moulin Quignon
jaw is one of them.
That was a discovery
that was made
in the 19th century
in France by one
of the founders of modern
archaeology, Jacques Boucher de
Perthes.
And he had been
conducting excavations
in the Somme River Valley
in Northeastern France.
And at this place,
Moulin Quignon,
he uncovered an anatomically
modern human jaw in a formation
that modern geologists tell
us is over 400,000 years old.
Now, in the same
formation, he also
found many stone
tools and weapons.
But many scientists
of that time could not
accept that humans existed
so far in the past.
So what they proposed was this.
Somebody must have gone
to some Roman cemetery
and taken a human jawbone
maybe 2,000 years old,
and then planted it in the
excavation for Boucher de
Perthes to find.
And actually, that's the
explanation for this discovery
that you see in the
modern textbooks.
What you don't see in
the modern textbooks
is that after he heard
these accusations,
Boucher de Perthes made
additional excavations
into the same formations under
conditions that completely
ruled out this hoax hypothesis.
The new excavations
were witnessed
by other professionals,
scientists.
And in these new
excavations, he excavated
100 additional anatomically
modern human bones and teeth
from the same formations.
And I think they
verify the reality
of the original discovery
of the human jaw he
found in those formations.
Now, this is a discovery
from the 19th century.
Now, some people
might wonder, well,
what about the 20th
century, more recent times.
There have been discoveries
from that same period,
between 300,000
and 400,000 years,
from more modern scientists.
Virginia Steen-McIntyre,
for example,
is an American geologist.
She was called down
to Mexico to date
an archaeological site at
a place called Hueyatlaco.
Some American
archaeologists there
had uncovered human artifacts,
stone tools and weapons.
And they wanted to
know how old they were.
So Virginia Steen-McIntyre
and her colleagues
went to that place.
And they used four scientific
methods to date the site.
And they concluded the
site must be at least
250,000 or 300,000 years old.
But the archaeologists
couldn't accept that.
They said human beings capable
of making these things did not
exist anywhere in the world
at that period of time,
and what to speak of being
present in North America.
The current scientific
idea is that there
are no human beings
in North America
any earlier than about
20,000 years ago.
>>REGINA: And here
you're finding
evidence 300 million years old.
>>CREMO: No, no.
This is 300,000.
>>REGINA: I know, but I'm
saying earlier we were talking.
And a couple of those--
>>CREMO: Oh, the earlier ones.
Oh, sure.
50 million--
>>REGINA: --all the way-- yeah.
>>CREMO: 300 million.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CREMO: Oh, sure.
There's hundreds of
discoveries of this nature.
>>REGINA: But again, it seems
that the world of science
refuses to allow that
to filter through.
And are you saying that even
today, the Moulin Quignon jaw
is still being posed as a
hoax if you were to search it?
>>CREMO: Yes.
If you search the
textbooks of archaeology--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CREMO: --today yes.
It's still being
proposed as a hoax.
>>REGINA: Even though
he offered another 100
pieces of evidence plus?
>>CREMO: Yeah, that
part of the story
is omitted from the textbook
accounts in most cases.
>>REGINA: One thing you bring
up in your book about this
is people may
object saying, well,
how can we take anything
seriously from 150 years ago?
They didn't have the technology
we have today for analysis.
And you bring up a
very interesting point.
>>CREMO: Well, you could look.
Darwin's theory comes
from over 150 years ago.
Newton and his laws of physics
come from further back in time
than that.
Einstein's theory
of relativity was
proposed well over
100 years ago.
I mean, you can't just
say that all science done
before midnight January
1, 1900 is bad science.
>>REGINA: Because it would
have to play both ways.
>>CREMO: That's right.
If you're going to
reject all science done
before any particular
date, then you
can't just reject the
discoveries that go against--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: --what you
now think is true.
You have to be
evenhanded in applying
such a standard like that.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>CREMO: So I think it's
a very bad argument.
>>REGINA: But I'm sure
people watching this
are thinking, yeah,
but they didn't
have the instrumentation.
And it's a valid one to bring
up if you're trying to--
>>CREMO: Well, that's
one reason why I always
refer to the modern
geological reports of the ages
of the formations in which
these objects are found.
Because I think it is important.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CREMO: And that
can't be overlooked.
And I'm very happy that any of
these cases from the earlier
history of archaeology
be reexamined
according to modern techniques.
>>REGINA: Technology
of today, yeah.
>>CREMO: But I don't think--
Although that should
and could be done,
I don't think we
can automatically--
>>REGINA: Invalidate.
>>CREMO: --dismiss reports.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Absolutely.
>>CREMO: Because if you
look at any textbook
of archaeology today,
it includes discoveries
that were made in the
same period of time.
You know, the first
Neanderthal discovery
was made in the
1850s in Germany.
The first Homo erectus discovery
was made in the 1890s in Java.
The first Neanderthal
discoveries-- oh, I already
mentioned that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you
mentioned that one.
>>CREMO: They were made
in Germany in the 1850s.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And the first
Australopithecus discoveries
were made in South Africa
early in the 20th century.
So every current
textbook of archaeology
is full of discoveries
that were made
from the same period of time.
>>REGINA: Right.
I just brought
that up, because I
thought if anybody's
wondering the same,
you have a beautiful
answer for it.
Now, we only have
about five or six
minutes left in
this conversation.
And I want to get
into the modern use.
I mean, we've already
looked at the Vedic texts
and starting to peg
certain periods of history
to some of the findings that
have happened in archaeology.
Now, the whole subject of using
psychic phenomena-- as people
are beginning to
awaken and accept
this aspect of themselves, this
is being used more and more
to start sussing out what
the condition of life was
and where bones are and what
kind of beings in society
existed at that time.
And it's gaining more credence.
And you told me off
camera about a woman
who is an archaeologist.
She's very psychic.
And she could start seeing the
complexity around the bones.
And can you talk about
that for a little bit,
and its place in the field of
discovery today and science?
>>CREMO: It's a
very good question.
I'm just back from a meeting
of the World Archaeological
Congress that was held on
the Dead Sea in Jordan.
And it's one of
the world's largest
international organizations
of archaeologists.
They meet every four years
in a different country.
So at this most recent
meeting, I presented a paper.
And I chose to present
a paper about how
a prominent
scientist, John Talbot
Robinson, famous for his
discoveries of the ape man
Australopithecus
in South Africa,
used a theosophist
psychic in his work
at the Sterkfontein cave
site in South Africa.
It's interesting what happened.
You know, he had
met this psychic
through a contact of his.
And he thought he might be
helpful for his research.
So he brought him to
the Sterkfontein caves.
And this man laid down there
and went into a yogic trance.
And Robinson would put a
fossil on his forehead,
for example, a tooth
of Australopithecus.
And this psychic,
this clairvoyant,
would be able to see the
whole creature and what
it was doing millions
of years ago.
And there were five sessions
like this that took place
on separate days
on different days
in the Sterkfontein caves
involving dozens of fossils
of many different
species of ape men.
And he was able to
report correctly
the anatomical details of these
creatures and their behavior.
And it helped Robinson
and his research.
So I thought it was
important for archaeologists
to understand that there are
different ways for getting
knowledge of the past.
I mean, one way is
to just take a fossil
and study it with different
radiometric dating methods
and chemical techniques
and physical measurements.
But I thought it was interesting
that a very prominent person,
a very prominent
scientist, had expanded
his way of doing things
to include a psychic.
>>REGINA: I think
it's totally valid.
>>CREMO: And there are
other archaeologists
who have also done that.
There was an
archaeologist in England
early in the 20th century
named Frederick Bligh Bond.
He was excavating the
Glastonbury Cathedral
in Glastonbury, England.
It had been destroyed during
the reign of King Henry
VIII in England
hundreds of years ago.
And he employed a psychic
who had the ability
to communicate with
past intelligences
by a technique called
automatic writing.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CREMO: In other words,
he could establish
some kind of link
between his consciousness
and the consciousness of
these departed personalities.
And then--
>>CREMO: Write out--
>>CREMO: --record--
>>REGINA: --what he was seeing.
>>CREMO: --write out
what they were seeing.
And it revealed the location
of an unknown chapel that
was part of that
cathedral complex.
And Frederick Bligh Bond
used this information
to guide his excavations.
And he confirmed
that it existed.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CREMO: And there are
other archaeologists
who've also employed these
psychic techniques as well.
>>REGINA: Which makes sense.
And we're waking up as
a species by the day.
I mean, our faculties
are opening up.
Many more people are
having these kind
of precognizant experiences
and many others.
So it makes sense to use
that vast consciousness that
precedes physicality that
you were talking about
to piece together who we are.
And on that note, we're
just about out of time.
And I want to thank you so much
for the immense amount of work
you've done to help
bring it to our awareness
that it's legitimate to
start raising these topics
and having this discussion now.
Really appreciate it.
Thank you, Michael.
>>CREMO: Thank you.
>>REGINA: If you
have not already
viewed our first conversation,
you may want to do that.
It gives a radically
different view
of how science should be used
alongside ancient religious
doctrine in piecing
together our distant past.
It's highly intriguing.
Meanwhile, you can connect
with Michael's work
by going to
forbiddenarcheology.com.
Until next time, thanks for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]